NOTE: Running this code on your PalmPC or HandheldPC may cause it to lose
data.  No warranty of any sort is provided.  Proceed at your own risk.
That being said, pressing the reset button will usually return the device
into WinCE as it normally does.  This being (part of) a debugger, though,
it is very possible to corrupt sections of WinCE user data.  No safeguards
are taken against that in the code.  You've been warned (twice).

The following files were taken from the Linux-MIPS kernel source:

gdb-stub.c		Slightly modified to remove some include files
gdb-low.S		Part of the exception handler
ld.script.little	Link script for the kernel

The other source files are:

entry.S			Entry point
gdb-support.c		Low-level serial IO routines
kernmisc.c		Some more stuff from the kernel that gdb-stub.c
			depends on

There are two versions of gdb-support.c. gdb-supoort.c.clio is specific
to the Vadem Clio.  gdb-support.c.freestyle is specific to the Everex
Freestyle, but should work on any VR4102 or higher based WinCE device
that doesn't have additional power management features on the serial port
beyond what is built into the CPU.  Rename the appropriate file to
gdb-support.c before running make.

Most of the include files are from the Linux kernel include dir, make
sure your cross-developement environment is set up to find them correctly.
This is usually done by making symbolic links to the linux and asm-mips
(link as asm) directories in a directory that is in the include path.

The Makefile assumes you have the mipsel cross-development tools
somewhere in path.  Note that these files must be compiled without
optimization (which the Makefile does) to insure the peripheral register
writes go in the correct order.  The code could have been modified to
make it optimization-safe (for example, all the registers should be cast
as volatile), but that would make it less clear.

Exceptions are not currently implemented, despite the presence of the part
in gdb-low.S.  The code in gdb-stub.c really wants to run as part of the
kernel, so I decided not to worry about exception handling until the Linux
CE kernel is in actual existence.  As a result of this, breakpoints are
not handled.  They can be set, but they will probably just cause a lock-up.

By the way, if you take a look at the code, I'm sure you'll realize what
an utter hack-job it is.  I don't want to hear it.  This is really only a
stopgap effort until the kernel is working, at which point gdb-stub.c
should be a lot happier.


Mike Klar
wyldfier@iname.com
